---
layout: post
title: Certificates and OpenSSL
---

OpenSSL is a useful tool for working with certificates, however its usage is often obscure and
challenging to get right. This is a cheat sheet for common operations.

## Installation

I find it easiest to work with OpenSSL at the Bash prompt. As I'm on Windows, this means using the
Windows Subsystem for Linux. With this running, install at least OpenSSL v1.1.1f via the following:

```bash
sudo apt-get install -y openssl
# Check the version installed
openssl version
```

## The file formats

When dealing with certificates, certificate requests, and private keys, you'll generally be working
with PEM format files. These are basically text files with a header and footer surrounding some base64
encoded data. The file extensions are typically `.key` for private keys, `.csr` for certificate requests,
and `.crt` for certificates. The contents will appear similar to the below, with the text in the header
and footer around the base64 data indicating the content.

```
-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
MIIGNzCCBR+gAwIBAgIRAMXBvoYhfBEw5+K+kj/8nI4wDQYJKoZIhvcNAQELBQAw
gY8xCzAJBgNVBAYTAkdCMRswGQYDVQQIExJHcmVhdGVyIE1hbmNoZXN0ZXIxEDAO
BgNVBAcTB1NhbGZvcmQxGDAWBgNVBAoTD1NlY3RpZ28gTGltaXRlZDE3MDUGA1UE
    ...lines omitted for brevity...
XvKsEcO2TvY+Dcxff5jggYAdrv4IHSkA33L9zAtvFjt3NO/H3d3qxBPE2CSbBmWw
djPNIn7JiaYbhSyz+mBXcxhnPAGqDVh0NyOI+kfgsLNol8Y8QFUxlNPRZNRSt+Hf
eT6Rt49bqgXOgv8=
-----END CERTIFICATE-----
```

The above is for a certificate (.crt). You will also see "BEGIN CERTIFICATE REQUEST" (.csr) and
"BEGIN PRIVATE KEY" (.key).

Another format you may have to work with is PKCS#12, which is typically in a .pfx file. This is a
binary format for storing a certificate chain and private key in a single, encrypted file, and is
often used if working with Windows or the Azure AppService to upload a certificate for a web server.

## Generating self-signed certificates

For local testing, it is common to generate a "self-signed" certificate. As this isn't signed by a
known and trusted authority, it will need to be manually placed in the "Trusted Root Certification
Authorities" certificate store on the computer to be used without displaying an error when browsing
to a site using it. This is still useful in development.

The quickest way to generate a self-signed certificate for `example.com` is via the below.

```bash
openssl req -newkey rsa:2048 -sha256 -nodes -x509 -days 365 -out example.crt -keyout example.key \
    -subj "/C=US/ST=Washington/L=Seattle/O=Example Inc/CN=example.com"
```

Breaking down the command line switches here:

- `req`: This is a request for a new certificate
- `-newkey rsa:2048`: Use RSA encryption with a 2048-bit key length. (Usually the default, but being explicit).
- `-sha256`: Use SHA256 as the digest algorithm. (Again, usually the default).
- `-nodes`: No DES. Do not protect the output files (including the private key) with a password.
- `-x509`: Generate a (self-signed) certificate, not a request for a certificate.
- `-days 365`: How long the certificate should be valid for.
- `-out <filename>`: The file to write the actual certificate to. (Does not include the private key).
- `keyout <filename>`: The file to write the private key to. (Keep this safe and secret!)
- `-subj <path>`: The details for the org the certificate is for. "CN" is the "Common Name", and the URL of the site.

If you leave off the `-subj` argument, you will be prompted at the command-line to provide these values.

### Extensions

Typically there are two "extensions" specified in in certificates. The first is the "Subject Alternate Name",
which is a list of other valid URLs this certificate covers. For example, typically a site will be accessible
via both the "naked" domain name (`example.com`) and the www-prefixed version (`www.example.com`). You aren't
just limited to domain names here. You can also put names such as `localhost`, or even IP addresses such
as `192.168.1.14`.

The other common extension is the intended usage of the certificate. For web certificates, this is commonly
set "client authentication" and "server authentication".

To specify all of this on the command-line, rather than in a config file, use the `-addext` flag. For example,
to make the certificate valid for `www.example.com`, `localhost`, and `127.0.0.1`, use:

```bash
openssl req -newkey rsa:2048 -sha256 -nodes -x509 -days 365 -out example.crt -keyout example.key \
    -subj "/C=US/ST=Washington/L=Seattle/O=Example Inc/CN=www.example.com" \
    -addext 'subjectAltName=DNS:www.example.com,DNS:localhost,IP:127.0.0.1' \
    -addext "extendedKeyUsage=serverAuth,clientAuth"
```

### Installing the self-signed certificate as trusted

To install the certificate on the machine so it is trusted (on Windows):

1. In Chrome or Edge, navigate to `chrome://settings`
2. In the search box type `manage certificates`
3. Click the link to open the dialog and go to the `Trusted Root Certification Authorities` tab
4. Click `Import`, then `Next`, then browse to the .crt file created above.

### Using the certificate on a web site

How you bind the certificate to an actual web site depends on the web server being used. If using
ASP.NET Core and it's provided "Kestrel" web server, then first generate a password protected .pfx
file containing the certificate and private key. For the above example files, this command would be:

```bash
# Convert into a triple-DES password protected pfx file including the private key (you be prompted for a password)
openssl pkcs12 -export -out example.pfx -inkey example.key -in example.crt -des3 -password
```

In your `appSettings.Development.json` (or `secrets.json`) you would then bind this to the site with:

```json
  "Kestrel": {
    "Certificates": {
      "Default": {
        "Path": "/somewhere/example.pfx",
        "Password": "TopSecret!"
      }
    }
  }
```

## Certificate requests

To provide a real SSL certificate for a web site, you must first generate a certificate request, and
then provide this to a "trusted authority" to issue (which they do by signing the request). This is
not too different to the above, with a couple of extra steps.

### Generate a certificate request

Generating the certificate request itself is actually easier than generating a self-signed certificate.
All you need to do is remove a couple of flags from the above command-line. Firstly, remove the `-x509`
flag, as we are not generating an actual certificate. Secondly, remove the `-days 365` flag, as the
certificate authority will set how many days the issued certificate is valid for. You'll also want to
change the output filename from `.crt` to `.csr` to indicate it is a request, not a certificate.

Many certificate authorities will also automatically generate the subject alternate names (including
the "naked" domain if a "www" domain is requested), and set the intended usage of the certificate,
so the `-addext` flags aren't needed. The final command being something like:

```bash
openssl req -newkey rsa:2048 -sha256 -nodes -out example.csr -keyout example.key \
    -subj "/C=US/ST=Washington/L=Seattle/O=Example Inc/CN=www.example.com"
```

Again, keep the .key file safe and secret (the authority never sees this key). The contents
of the .csr file are what will be provided to the authority. (Typically the contents are cut and
pasted into a web form).

### Prove domain ownership

Before any (trustworthy) authority issues your certificate, they are going to verify that you
own the domain you are requesting a certificate for. Typically this is done by you either registering
a DNS record in the domain to prove you own it, or via an email sent to an admin account for the domain
(e.g. `admin@example.com`) which will contain a verification link.

### Create the certificate bundle

Once the authority is happy you own the domain, they will send you an email containing a set of certificates.
The primary certificate is the certificate you requested, now signed by the authority. The other certificates
are the certificates in the trust chain all the way back to the root certificate. Your web server needs
all the certificates in this chain, as well as the private key, to enable SSL connections.

Some web servers expect all the certificates in a bundle. This is simply a concatenation of all the
text files (recall they are base64). For example, the below is the list of files I got from my certificate
authority (<https://comodosslstore.com/>). The first is my domain certificate, the next two are intermediate
certificate authorities, and the last is the root certificate authority.

```bash
cat www_example_com.crt SectigoRSADomainValidationSecureServerCA.crt USERTrustRSAAAACA.crt AAACertificateServices.crt >> ssl_bundle.crt
```

As was done for the self-signed certificate, for use with ASP.NET Core's Kestrel server (or with Azure
AppService) this should be packaged along with the private key into a password protected .pfx file.

```bash
openssl pkcs12 -export -out example.pfx -des3 -inkey example.key -in ssl_bundle.crt -password
```

This is then bound to the web server via the settings as for the .pfx file for the self-signed certificate.
(Or via the Azure Portal for Azure AppService - see <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/app-service/configure-ssl-certificate#upload-certificate-to-app-service>).

## Bonus material

Below are several other commands I've found handy when working with certificates and requests with OpenSSL.

```bash
# To view the details of a private key
openssl rsa -text -noout -in example.key

# To view the details of a certificate request
openssl req -text -noout -in example.csr

# To view the details of a certificate
openssl x509 -text -noout -in example.crt

# To verify the private key, certificate request, and certificate match
# This extracts the public key from each file and reports the sha256 hash of it
openssl pkey -pubout -in ./example.key        | openssl sha256
openssl req  -pubkey -in ./example.csr -noout | openssl sha256
openssl x509 -pubkey -in ./example.crt -noout | openssl sha256
```